--------------------------------------------------------------------------
To subscribe/unsubscribe to the hdfnews mailing list, please send your 
request to hdfnews-request@ncsa.uiuc.edu
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      Newsletter #17
                      August 4, 1995

Contents

    o HDF4.0 Beta1 release
    o HDF User's Guide is on NCSA ftp
    o hdfnews-request and sci.data.format
    o Experimental Server-side HDF Web Browser
    o Update of HDF home page and FAQ 
    o NASA EOSDIS vendor workshop
    o New Features of the Collage HDF Browser for X Windows

HDF4.0 Beta1 release
--------------------

HDF 4.0, Beta Release No. 1, is now available on the NCSA anonymous ftp
server (ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu; HDF/HDF4.0.beta). HDF 4.0 represents a
substantial revision and expansion of the HDF library over HDF 3.3.
Although this is only a Beta release, we encourage you to try it out, as
it represents a substantial improvement over HDF 3.3 in terms of features,
performance, and code quality.

Details about the new release can be found in the file ABOUT_4.0b1 that is
distributed with the release.  The following text briefly describes the new
features available in HDF 4.0, bugs fixed and known problems, and platforms
tested so far.

1. New features in HDF4.0 Beta 1 release

   o Multi-file Annotation Interface (ANxxx)
     The multi-file annotation Interface is for accessing
     file/object label/description. It allows users to keep open
     more than one file at a time, and to access more than one
     annotation at a time.  It also allows multiple labels
     and multiple descriptions to be applied to an HDF object
     or HDF file.

   o Multi-file Raster Image interface, with subsetting, subsampling
     and general attribute support
     The new Generic Raster (GR) interface provides a set of
     functions for manipulating raster images of all kinds.
     This interface allows users to keep open more than one
     file at a time, and to "attach" more than one raster
     image at a time.  It supports a more general framework
     for attributes within the RIS data-model, allowing
     'name = value' style metadata.  It allows access to
     subsamples and subsets of images.
     HDF4.0beta1 implements only the C interface. The Fortran
     interface will be available in next beta release.

   o New Compression Algorithms and interface
     A new low-level compression interface has been added to
     the HDF library which allows any data-object to be
     compressed using a variety of algorithms.  Currently only
     two compression algorithms are supported: Run-Length
     Encoding (RLE) and adaptive Huffman.

   o JPEG Group v5b library
     HDF Version 4.0 libraries now use v5 of the Independent
     JPEG Group (IJG) JPEG file access library.

   o Compression and "n-bit" integer support for HDF SDS
     Two new compression functions have been added to the
     SD interface in this release to compress SDS datasets.
     One function allows users to compress a scientific
     dataset  using RLE encoding or adaptive Huffman
     compression algorithms. Another one is for storing
     a scientific dataset in 1-32 bit integer values
     (instead of being restricted to 8, 16 or 32-bit sizes).

   o External Path Handling
     New functions have been added to allow applications to
     specify directories to create or search for external
     files.

   o Parallel I/O for CM5
     An extension using the parallel I/O in CM5 has been
     added to the SDS interface.  Initial tests have resulted
     in about 25 MBytes/second I/O throughput using the
     SDA (Scalable Disk Array) file system. The library
     provides interfaces for both C* and CMF programming
     languages. 

   o HDF dumper
     Hdp is a command line utility designed for quick
     display of contents and data of HDF3.3 objects, RIS,
     SDS, Vdata and Vgroup. It can list the contents of
     hdf files at various levels with different details.
     It can also dump the data of one or more specific
     objects in the file.

     Currently hdp works on SunOS and LINUX only. 

   o Auto configuration
     It is now possible to automatically configure and build
     both the HDF library and netCDF library with one command.


2. Bugs fixed and known problems

  Several bugs or problems, such as failure in setting
  and getting scales for unlimited dimensions, missing
  Fortran version of VSQxxxx functions, failure in
  defining more than 36 fields in Vdatas, etc. were
  fixed in this beta release.

3. Platforms tested

HDF4.0 Beta 1 has been tested on these systems:

  SunOS 4.1.3, SunOS 5.3 (Solaris 2.3), SGI/IRIX5.3, Linux,
  HP/UX 9.01, IBM RS6000/AIX (C only), C3880/ConvexOS,11.0,
  DEC alpha/OSF (C only), DecStation/MIPSEL (C only), CM5,
  Cray C90, Free BSD 2.0, Windows NT. See the INSTALL file
  at the top level of HDF4.0b1 for more details.


HDF 3.3 User's Guide now on NCSA ftp
-------------------------------------

A complete draft of the HDF 3.3 User's Guide has recently been completed and
can be found on the NCSA anonymous ftp server (ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu) in the
directory: HDF/Documentation/HDF3.3/Users_Guide/HDF3.3_draft/. The document
is available in two formats: Adobe PostScript (extension ".ps"), and
Framemake mif (".mif").

This User's Guide contains a chapter on each of the APIs supported in HDF
3.3, as well as a chapter on HDF utilities.  For each API, there is a
description of the data model supported by the API, a programming model for
using the API, a description of each routine in the API, and examples.


hdfnews-request and sci.data.format
-----------------------------------

We have created an email address for administration of the hdfnews list.
It follows network convention and is called:

        hdfnews-request@ncsa.uiuc.edu

Please send all administrative requests concerning hdfnews to
the above address (e.g., subscription, unsubscription, errors,
problems, etc.) rather than directly to the list.

There is also a newsgroup sci.data.format which was set up as a forum
for discussion of HDF-related questions as well as other file formats.
You may want to submit your questions there if you want to reach a larger
audience.

As always, if you have any questions you would like to send directly to the
HDF group, you can send them to hdfhelp@ncsa.uiuc.edu.


Experimental Server-side HDF Web Browser
---------------------------------------

The HDF group is working on an "HDF Experimental Scientific File Server" in
the form of a WWW server-side version of the HDF brows-o-rama now available
in the X-windows version of NCSA Mosaic.  This software sits on a WWW
server and creates HTML versions of HDF files for browsing and examination.

A major advantage of having brows-o-rama functionality at the server,
rather than in the client, is that one can examine the contents of very
large HDF files without having to transfer them first to a host machine.
Another is that one can use any web browser on any platform to view HDF
files.

Some features of the server:

  o In-line display of small, subsampled versions of raster images.
  o Display of attributes for SDSs
  o Display of annotations for objects and files
  o Forms with scroll-boxes allowing you to select individual raster
    images, SDSs, Vdatas, and Vgroups
  o Ability to select and view subsets and subsamples of SDSs
  o Display of Vgroup structures.

If your browser allows you to load a file to disk, then you can load an SDS
or Vdata directly into a file on your host, then import it into an
application such as a spreadsheet program or word processor.

Because the HDF library's support the netCDF format, you can also use the
browser to examine the contents of netCDF files.

Although the software currently exists as a very rough prototype, we invite
you try it out.  But don't be surprised if some parts don't quite work.
The temporary URL is

       http://hdf.ncsa.uiuc.edu:4321/.

Let us know what you think about it.  Send comments and suggestions to
hdfhelp@ncsa.uiuc.edu.

Update of HDF home page and FAQ
-------------------------------

The HDF home page at http://hdf.ncsa.uiuc.edu:8001 has been updated
with such items as 'Future Plans for HDF', 'HDF Progress Report', 
and this Newsletter.  We encourage you to take a look at it.

The FAQ, available via anonymous ftp to ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu in
the HDF/ directory has also been updated.  The html version on the 
HDF Information server will be updated the week of August 7th.

NASA EOSDIS vendor workshop
---------------------------

NASA's Earth Science Data and Information System Project (ESDISP) is
contacting vendors regarding their interest in learning more about EOS
conventions and HDF. Information regarding the seminar is on the HDF
home page (hdf.ncsa.uiuc.edu) under What's New.


New Features of the Collage HDF Browser for X Windows
-----------------------------------------------------

NCSA Collage for X windows has undergone some changes.  The new version
(NCSA Collage 1.3.1 for X windows), has the following changes:

1. The browser in Collage now allows the user to look at different
attributes of an HDF data set by selecting them with toggle buttons using
the mouse. There is a new toggle frame containing the most frequently used
6 attributes: name, long_name, valid_max, valid_min, format, unit, and the
tag and reference number of the data set. There are also a "Default" toggle
button that displays both tag and ref when pressed, and an  "All" toggle
button that displays all the attributes listed above when pressed.

2. There is now an interpolation feature that interpolates animations.  Now
animation can be scaled by any factor x and Collage will take care of all
the computations involved in proper enlargment of image.

3. Error handling has been substantially improved, including
   - Doodles are now clipped properly on white board
   - White board used to crash occasionally, but the bugs have
     been fixed so that whiteboard is now stable
   - X Collage1.3 will now successfully connect with Windows Collage1.3,
     which it would not do previously.
   - Some DTM errors have been fixed

4. Some new ports:
   - The code has been ported to Motif 1.2 and X11R5
   - The code has been compiled for Solaris 2.3 and 2.4, although the
     collage_server is still buggy.

5. Problems not yet solved:
   - textboard is still not stable.
   - server connections have been tested but still some errors may be
     present, especially in low level dtm calls.








